The old ex-cop interrupts the conversation. After speaking for 15 minutes with the compulsion of a prisoner during a family visit, he suddenly stops short and says to me and my two photographers: “Can you show me your ID?” We put them on the table of this palm-roofed bar in the municipality of San Benito. He looks at a photo, looks up, and looks at us. He does this three times in total. “You see?! You can end up being paranoid,” he says by way of explanation. Yes, there are a lot of people in Petén who are paranoid. And they have good reason to be.

The veteran ex-cop worked for more than five years in Guatemala’s anti-gang unit. He brags about knowing the leaders. When he talks about Aldo Dupié, the best-known leader of the Barrio 18 gang, he calls him by his nickname of “Lobito,” the little wolf. Dupié has been locked up for the last 20 years for crimes such as extortion and homicide, and was sentenced to nearly 200 years in jail. But that was not when the police officer threw in the towel.

After chasing gang members, the former cop went on to work in video-surveillance operations. “They couldn’t see me on the street,” he explains about his transfer to a police base. “They would have killed me.” But he carried on.

In 2012, he was sent to work in Chiquimula, which borders Honduras and El Salvador and was one of the most conflict-ridden departments of Guatemala at the time. This was back when the Mexican crime syndicate Los Zetas was fighting with many of the Guatemalan drug families over the control of territories. At that time, Chiquimula nearly tripled the national homicide rate, which was 34 for every 100,000 inhabitants. “They left bodies for me everywhere,” he recalls. But still he continued.

They transferred him to intelligence, and then to criminal investigation. “Practically everyone there had me in their sights,” he says, gulping down his beer, his white shirt soaked with sweat. The garment is dripping as if it were a soggy sponge, and every movement of his body appears to be a hand that is wringing it out. By that point, he suspected that both criminals and his colleagues in the police wanted him dead, so he requested a transfer in 2016. “And they sent me to Petén,” he says, forcing out a bitter laugh. “They looked at me like I was an ogre,” he says. “Think about it, I came from intelligence…”

It wasn’t because of the gangs, nor was it the investigations into drug traffickers in the capital. It wasn’t even the wiretaps that implicated the police in criminal activities, nor Los Zetas in Chiquimula. The reason that this police officer decided that his organization was trying to kill him was because they sent him here, to Petén. That was when he quit.

The ex-cop finishes reciting his problems with the police force that he walked away from a couple of months ago, and now he answers my questions about Petén, with another beer on the table. But we enter a dead end. In this jungle-filled department that borders with the Mexican states of Tabasco, Chiapas and Campeche, the biggest one in Guatemala, the answer is always the same, no matter who you ask: “You can’t go there.”